---
layout: post.njk
title: "rdf2gephi : load RDF graphs in Gephi"
author: Thomas Francart
date: 2025-02-13
description: Gephi is an open-source graph visualization and manipulation software. Use it to render your RDF knowledge graphs by converting them in the appropriate format.
tags: RDF, Gephi
permalink: en/posts/{{ title | slugify }}/
linkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/posts/thomasfrancart_github-sparna-gitrdf2gephi-a-converter-activity-7295837773482131456-wZH0 
bluesky: 
mastodon: 
---

<p class="lead">I have never been a fan of the "bubble and arrows" kind of graph visualizations. It is generaly useless.</p>

But when you can see the entire graph, and can tune the rendering, you start understanding the topology and structure - and ultimately you can tell a story with your graph (and that's what we all love, stories).

[Gephi](https://gephi.org/) is a graph visualization tool to tell these sort of stories with graphs, that has been around for 15 (20 ?) years. Interestingly, while quite a number of Gephi plugins exist to load data (including from neo4j), no decent working plugin exist to load RDF data (yes, there was a "SemanticWebImport" plugin, but it looks outdated, with an old documentation, and does not work with latest - 0.10 - version of Gephi). This doesn't tell anything good for the semantic knowledge graph community.

A few weeks ago I literally stumbled upon an old project we developed in 2017 to convert RDF graphs into the GEXF format that can be loaded in Gephi. Time for a serious cleaning, reengineering, and packaging ! So here is a v1.0.0 of the rebranded **[rfd2gephi](https://github.com/sparna-git/rdf2gephi)** utility tool !

The tool runs as a command line that can read an RDF knowledge graph (from files or a SPARQL endpoint), execute a set of SPARQL queries, and turn that into a set of nodes and edges in a GEXF file. rdf2gephi provides default queries to run a simple conversion without any parameters, but most of the time you will want to tune how your graph is turned into GEXF nodes and edges (for example, in my case, `org:Membership` entities relating `foaf:Persons` with `org:Organizations` are not turned into nodes, but into edges, and I want to ignore some other entities).

And then what ? then you can load the GEXF file in Gephi, and run a few operations to showcase your graph (see the little screencast video I recorded) : run a layout algorithm, color nodes based on their rdf:type or another attribute you converted, change their size according to the (in-)degree, detect clusters based on a modularity algorithm, etc. etc. - and then export as SVG, PNG, or another format. Also, one of the cool feature supported by the GEXF format are dynamic graphs, where each nodes and edges can be associated to a date range. You can then see your graph evolving through time, like in a movie !

I hope I will be able to tell a more concrete Gephi-powered, RDF-backed graph-story in a future post !


